Post: dont rerender all FlatList items (#5)
brains-and-beards/open-brainsandbeards-com: src/pages/markdown/2022-dont-rerender-all-flatlist-items/index.md

![Our awesome app to collect positive customer feedback](2022-dont-rerender-all-flatlist-items-snack.gif)

At the first glance, everything about the app looks great.

</div>

You can [see the app code and tinker with it on _Snack_](https://snack.expo.dev/@sakydpozrux/your-feedback-matters---list-rerendering).

It's _just a list_, we said. We tested the app on a simulator, and it looked correct. What can go wrong? Let's publish it! 🚀

```tsx {numberLines: true}
export const HomeScreen: React.FC = () => {
  const { answers, updateAnswer } = useSurveyAnswers();

  const renderItem: ListRenderItem<SurveyAnswer> = useCallback(
    ({ item: answer }) => {
      const setValue = (newValue: number) => {
        updateAnswer({ id: answer.id, value: newValue });
      };

      return <FormListItem answer={answer} setValue={setValue} />;
    },
    []
  );

  return (
    <SafeAreaView style={styles.container}>
      <FlatList
        contentContainerStyle={styles.contentContainer}
        data={answers}
        ListHeaderComponent={FormHeader}
        renderItem={renderItem}
      />

      <FormFooter style={styles.footer} />
    </SafeAreaView>
  );
};
```

So we did it. 🔥

> As soon as the first users received the new app and started using it, the first negative reviews were coming. Some users were complaining that the app was slow when sliding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As soon as the first users received the new app and started using it, the first negative reviews started coming. Some users were complaining that the app was slow when sliding.
```

Each sliding step results in the whole list re-render.

</div>

#### Flamegraph chart

To further investigate why it is so, we can use _React DevTools_ profiler. It's available in [_Flipper_](https://fbflipper.com). _Flamegraph_ tab brings special interest. It contains a timeline of _React_ state changes. We can go step-by-step, and for each step, see a chart with clear indicators:

 - which component has rendered,
 - why the component has rendered,
 - and how long it took to render a particular component.

Green rectangles represent components that have rendered in this selected step. Gray rectangles represent components that have not rendered. Sadly, we don't see much gray here.

<div class="gif-container">

![Profiling gives more insights](2022-dont-rerender-all-flatlist-items-before-profiler-short.gif)

Everything green is re-rendering. It's bad.

</div>

#### Theory

_React_ re-renders components when _props_ or _state_ change. By default, re-render propagates to all children components. Chart shows the `FlatList` component re-rendered because of the `data` prop change. It's where we pass `answers`.

> Here is an example of how the `answers` list (`data` prop) looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of how the `answers` array (`data` prop) looks like:
```

```ts
const answers = [
  {
    "id": "0",
    "value": 8,
    "question": "Wide selection in the menu"
  },
  {
    "id": "1",
    "value": 6,
    "question": "Menu easy to read"
  },
  {
    "id": "2",
    "value": 9,
    "question": "Order was taken promptly"
  },
]
```

State in _React_ is _immutable_, which means we can't update a single item in an array and use the same array again to render the next UI.

If we want to change the rate `value` in a single answer, let's say "_Menu easy to read_" from _6_ to _7_, we have to create a copy of the old list with a single item different. It results in a new `answers` object.

In console logs "_Data has changed_" represents `answers` value change, but we see it each time user updates just one of his answers. It's because whenever user slides one list item slider new `answers` list is passed as a new `data` prop value, which results in re-rendering the whole `FlatList` and all it's children. 

However, there is a way to avoid those unnecessary re-renders and save CPU time. It will help slow smartphones to catch up with performance. 🐌

## Let's give data the shape

> What if we could change the shape of the `data` list prop passed to `FlatList` to have the same value always?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if we could change the shape of the `data` prop passed to `FlatList` to have the same value always?
```

> In the list `data`, we can store just ids referring to "full" items. It's just a `string[]` list, not a list of complex objects with a `value` field. When the user slides the slider and updates the `value,` it won't change the item `id`. The `data` list will stay unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside `data`, we can store just ids referring to "full" items. That would make it a `string[]` list, not a list of complex objects with a `value` field. When the user slides the slider and updates the `value`, it won't change the item `id`. The `data` list will stay unchanged.
```

    },
    "1": {
      "value": 6,
      "question": "Menu easy to read"
    },
    // ...
  };
}
```

To get the list of items without knowing too many details about item internals, we can use `dataIdsList`. This object won't be updated when _the details_ of some items change, which won't cause re-rendering.

To get details of a single object, we can use `dataById`. For example, the updated list item component (`NormalizedFormListItem`) uses it to get item details while having only `id` as an input: `state.dataById[id]`.

Old `renderItem` needed a full `answer` object as a param. It can be simplified:

```javascript
// before fixes
const renderItem: ListRenderItem<SurveyAnswer> = useCallback(
  ({ item: answer }) => {
    const setValue = (newValue: number) => {
      updateAnswer({ id: answer.id, value: newValue });
    };

    return <FormListItem answer={answer} setValue={setValue} />;
  },
  []
);
```

The new `renderItem` that supports normalized data now as a param needs only item id (`answerId`) to render complete `NormalizedFormListItem`. There is also no need for `useCallback` anymore because we can now move it out of the `HomeScreen` component:

> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: I see you're using javascript code block here.
I remember I was using ```tsx and ```ts, but I don't know if that makes any difference. You can check that, if you're bored :)

Reviewer 2: great work btw.

Author: Thanks! It makes a difference. Fixed 👍
